Sergey: 0:00
Imagine someday
building a home robot that can perform a
variety of tasks in your kitchen. Then it
becomes a lot more than just a perception
problem. Then you really need to be able to
learn the individual manipulation skills you
need to be able to generalise very broadly.
Craig: 0:12
Hi, I'm Craig Smith and this is Eye on AI. Today I
talked to Sergey Levine, an associate professor at
the University of California, Berkeley, who does
research at the robotic artificial intelligence
and learning lab at the university and is pushing
the boundaries of what AI control of robots can
do. Sergey talked about some of his recent work in
reinforcement learning and the aggregation of data
sets from robots around the world to help train a
model that can generalise across different kinds
of robots. It's exciting research into embodied
AI, bringing the transformative technology out of
the computer and into the real world. I hope you
find the conversation as fascinating as I did. So,
Sergey, could you start by introducing yourself?
Sergey: 1:11
So I'm an associate professor at UC
Berkeley, I previously did my PhD at Stanford, and
I also spend one day a week at robotics at Google,
where I also work on robotic learning. My
research concerns, of course, robotics,
but also many other related techniques in
machine learning, reinforcement learning. Lately,
my group has also been doing work on various
things related to reinforced learning for
language models, computational design, things
like this, and other aspects of decision making.
Craig: 1:43
Everyone's
talking about world models and
they're combining world models and
language models. Are you working on world
models at all? What's your view of that?
Sergey: 1:54
Yeah, I guess there are a few things I could
say about it. So generally, if we want to control
robotic systems, there are a number of ways that
machine learning can enable that. One very simple
way is imitation learning. Imitation learning
amounts to taking demonstrations, typically
provided by a person controlling the system,
and then imitating those demonstrations to try
to produce an agent. Robots can work for lots
of other things. Arguably, language models
are just giant imitation learning machines
because they're imitating how humans generate
text. There are lots of other ways to do it.
Sergey: 2:32
So a world model is essentially a
dynamics model that represents how the environment
will evolve in response to the agent's actions,
and we can learn that from data too. Typically
in reinforced learning that's referred to as
model-based RL. So model-based RL means you train
a model of how your environment behaves and then
you use that model to figure out how to act in the
world. And it's a very old discipline actually. In
fact, the first learning-based control methods,
before model-free RL became such a popular thing,
were actually model-based RL methods. Some of
the earliest neural network control methods
actually used dynamics modelling. And
again, there are a million different
ways to instantiate this. You could instantiate
dynamics models or world models by, for example,
taking image observations and doing video
prediction. You could also instantiate them by
learning non-reconstructive representations,
or representations that, roughly speaking,
capture the state of the system without
necessarily grounding it back into pixels,
and then predict that. So there's a lot
of different approaches for doing this.
Craig: 3:35
Recently I've been
talking to Wave about their Gaia model and I've
seen the videos. But they have that model built
into a controller, connected to a controller, to
operate an autonomous vehicle. What's different
about that structure or architecture from what
you're working on with reinforcement learning?
Sergey: 4:01
I don't think there's that much I could say
about it, because I don't know how their system
works. I mean, I've seen the public material,
same as everyone else, but I don't really have
any insight about the details there. Maybe one
thing I would say, though, that most methods for
learning-based control don't necessarily need to
predict the raw pixels that the robot's camera
will observe in the future. That is one way to do
it, and there's a lot that can be done with that,
but I think that the more significant distinction
is actually how well we're able to utilise
data to then produce more optimal decisions,
and going through prediction is one way to do
it, and you could predict pixels, which is what
video prediction models do. You could also predict
outcomes or rewards, which is what value functions
do. At the end of the day, they're actually not
all that different, and maybe a bigger distinction
as to whether you can get a system that really
works in the real world is what data is trained
on. For example, if you want robotic manipulation
systems that will actually work in broad,
open-world environments, you need to train them on
data for broad, open-world environments. So a lot
of what I'm actually concerned with in my research
is how do we develop learning-based control
techniques that can use large amounts of data, and
how do we figure out what data sets we can acquire
to get really generalizable? In my case, often
robotic manipulation skills, but also robotic
navigation skills and things like that Systems
for manipulation for things like warehousing.
Sergey: 5:34
Oftentimes those
problems can be to a large extent reduced to
perception problems. So if you structure your
environment in the right way, then as long as
you're able to detect where the objects are,
then you can use hand design strategies
for tackling that. That tends not to work
so well. If you want to take the robotic system
into more open-world environments Like if you
imagine someday building a home robot that can
perform a variety of tasks in your kitchen,
then it becomes a lot more than just a perception
problem. Then you really need to be able to learn
the individual manipulation skills and you
need to be able to generalise very broadly.
Sergey: 6:05
So maybe one thing that
I could discuss here that could be relevant is a
project that we actually did recently. This was
actually a collaboration between Google, Berkeley
and several other universities on trying to see
how we could get robotic controllers that actually
generalise across different robot morphologies.
That's actually really important because if a
lot of this comes down to data, then, it's very
difficult to get the kind of breadth and diversity
of data from a single robot that can allow the
kind of broad generalisation that you want from
a home robot. But if you can pool data from lots
of different robots, then maybe you can actually
get that kind of coverage. And, furthermore, if
you can actually do that and you get a system that
generalises across robots, then you get something
really cool which is, in principle, someone could
put together some new robotic system and then plug
this kind of robot brain into it and immediately
get something that can control that robot. Now,
the work that we did so far on this wasn't really
that concerned with building better models so much
as just getting this diverse data set and just
applying the kind of standard techniques that we
had already developed in previous works and that
actually worked decently well. So this project was
called RTX and the idea there was that we got data
from In the end it was 34 different research labs.
Sergey: 7:19
Google was one of them,
Berkeley was. Actually there were two labs in
Berkeley that contributed to this and then we
trained a model on this to perform basically
language-conditioned manipulation tasks.
Sergey: 7:29
So I think you give the
robot an instruction, pick up the tomato and put
it in the bowl, and the robot is supposed to do
that. And then we took this model and we handed
it off to the different labs that contributed
data and had them tested in comparison to
whatever model they had for their research,
basically trained on their own system, and the
multi-robot model actually was, on average,
about 50% better in terms of success rate, and
that's actually pretty interesting because this
was competing with whatever each lab's
individual system was and presumably
third-good researchers. They built something
that works pretty well in their system. Now,
this was actually an imitation learning approach,
language-conditioned imitation. I think that,
whether it's imitation or prediction or
world modelling, I mean, I think many of
those techniques could be made to work.
I think the higher-order bit here that I
wanted to get across is that by actually getting
this data set, you could actually get a system
that you could plug into all these different
robots and actually get good results out of it.
Craig: 8:16
Hmm, that's fascinating.
That model was being trained on data sets
from all the various participating labs.
Sergey: 8:25
Yeah, so in these
experiments we were not testing whether it could
generalise to a new robot. That's a very exciting
frontier for this, but that's still in the future.
This was just trying to answer the question:
if you include data from the other labs,
does that one lab's robot get better? Now,
of course, if you're sort of in the minority,
if you're one of the groups that contributed a
relatively small amount of data, you would
expect to see comparatively more benefit
from everyone else. Interestingly, actually, even
the majority contributors saw a lot of benefits.
Sergey: 8:52
So probably the largest data
set at about 100,000 trials was from Google's own
robot, the mobile base that we used in a lot of
the robotics research there. With that system, we
were able to actually test it on various tests. We
have this kind of test suite of difficult queries.
They're actually meant to be queries that require
synthesising pretrained knowledge from the web
as well as good instruction following ability,
so these require spatial reasoning, things
like that, and on the hardest test, we actually
saw three X improvement in performance over just
using the Google data set. Now that's actually,
in my mind, pretty profound, because the
Google data set was very carefully curated,
collected by basically professionals
that were collecting robot data,
and the fact that including all these additional
sources of data from a long list of academic
labs actually led to that much improvement
really suggests that there is something kind
of magical that happens when you combine enough
data from enough different sources. Yeah, so for
these experiments we were actually passing the
model around. Okay, the data set is public now.
Sergey: 9:54
So anybody could
take that data set and download it and
train their own models. And we actually
have an ongoing effort at UC Berkeley that my
students are For that initial experiment. It
was just the model weights. Hmm, that's
fascinating. Just the model weights.
Craig: 10:09
So the architecture
of that model was being replicated in each
lab. They weren't using their own model.
Sergey: 10:16
Correct, yeah,
so it was exactly the same model
with exactly the same weights,
that had to drive all of the robots in all
the locations. Yeah, and that is actually,
if you think about it, it's a very non-trivial
thing, right? Because all the model gets to
see is what the robot receives through the camera
and has to figure out that. Okay, now I'm driving
a U-shaped robot, A UR-10 industrial robot,
versus now I'm driving a low-cost WTOX robot.
Or now I'm driving a Franca or the Google
robot and adjust the controls accordingly.
Craig: 10:44
When I was at the lab,
I recall that you had robots that were network,
so the learnings from one were updating a central
brain and that then was controlling the other
robots of each robot. Have you done broader
experiments like that, very much like this?
Sergey: 11:05
Yeah, yeah, I'm glad you asked
that. So this was a lot of what we were trying
to do for over the last five years actually,
and in some ways, this multi-robot training effort
it's kind of partly it came about kind of an
acknowledgement of the limitations of this kind
of arm farm approach. So getting lots of robots
in a room is great if you want to prototype,
let's say, reinforcement learning algorithms,
but if you really want broad generalisation out
of it, they can't all be in the same room. So
you really need to get much better coverage of
the world, and by aggregating data from robots
in many different sites now, you can get much
better coverage. Now this is still a prototype
for what might be a larger system, because these
are still data sets collected by researchers
essentially doing science experiments. So you
could imagine that in the future, the aggregation
wouldn't be across different research labs,
it would be across different deployed robots.
Sergey: 12:01
Now that, of course,
is a much more complex undertaking that requires
more than just science. It also requires some
kind of organisational effort, consensus from
companies and so on. But that, I think, is kind
of the real thing once that comes about and you
could imagine a future where the data streams from
a variety of different deployed robots in lots
of locations are agglomerated and then used to
train one centralised robotic brain, which can
then be handed back to these robots to improve
their performance. And the key thing that we want
to take a risk with this project is just if you do
this at any scale, you know, even at the scale of
academic labs can you even get a policy that can
drive all the different robots? Because if that's
not possible, then aggregating heterogeneous data
wouldn't work and we would need to somehow figure
out standardisation. Standardisation is hard,
so what we know now is that we don't have
to worry as much about standardisation.
Craig: 12:50
Yeah, because, yeah,
this model, then the weights are being
passed around and they're controlling
different form function robots, right, I
mean? Or were they all just variations?
Sergey: 13:00
So in these experiments the robots were all
arms with parallel jaw grippers. We are right now
experimenting with generalisation across single
arm and bimanual systems. At some point in the
future we'll also look at multi-fingered systems,
things like that. So far the truth in advertising
it's one arm with a parallel draw gripper. They're
just different brands of arms. Now they do vary
a lot. So the small scale hobbyist widow X arm
is maybe 50 centimetres long, kind of smaller,
with a weak gripper. The big, your 10 robot,
is an industrial robot meant for manufacturing,
quite a bit bigger, beefier, has a stronger motor,
stronger gripper, that sort of thing. So there's
variability. They're still the same sort.
Craig: 13:43
Right, and the model
that you're training on this aggregated data is
the reinforcement. Can you describe that model?
Sergey: 13:50
We actually trained
two models. One was based on the RT1 model which
was developed at Google last year. The RT1 model
is basically a transformer that reads in
language instruction, commands, an image,
and then it outputs discretized, tokenized
actions. So it's kind of almost like the most
obvious way to design a transformer based policy.
The second model was the RT2 model, which is a
more recent development, which actually uses a
backbone from a pre-trained vision language model.
Sergey: 14:23
So vision language
models are trained to look at images and output
responses to textual questions. So you give it
a picture and you say like is there a dog in the
picture? And it will produce some text to answer
that. And then we took this vision language
pre-trained backbone and then further fine
tuned on robot data to output robot actions
in response to robot observations. So you can
sort of think of it like the VLM has a number of
tasks that it can do. It can answer questions,
it can produce captions. Now there's one more
task which is given a robot instruction output
the actions for the robot. Now that's a much
more powerful model because it has all that
internet knowledge baked into it from the vision
language model pre-training and that's the one
that we used for the more complex queries with
the spatial relations and things like that.
Craig: 15:03
Is most of your work on the
data side or on the model side.
Sergey: 15:08
Well, it's really both and to some extent
they also go hand in hand because, depending
on what your algorithms are able to handle,
that will inform the kind of data that you need
to get. For example, a lot of the more algorithmic
work that my lab does these days is concerned with
techniques for offline reinforcement learning.
Sergey: 15:26
Offline reinforcement
learning is basically a way to take data and
produce more optimal policies. So imitation
learning methods. They take in data and they
produce policies that reproduce the behaviour
in the data. Offline RL methods take in data and
attempt to produce behaviours that are better than
the average behaviour in the data. So intuitively
you can think of it as using data to figure
out what options are available to you and then
selecting the best among those options. In fact,
methods that use world models, as we discussed
before, can be seen as offline RL methods
because typically the way they work is they
train the world model on existing data and
then they use it to extract better control
strategies than the typical thing that was
demonstrated in the data set. But there are
also other ways to build offline RL techniques
that don't rely on world models, that rely
on value functions and things like that.
Craig: 16:06
Where do you think
the research is heading, because everything's
moving so fast? Is there for robotic control?
Do you think that the research will settle
on one architecture and then there will be
different flavours of that architecture, but
everyone will agree that this is the best way,
and then it's a matter of training, generalising
across robots and networking data? Or do you
think that there will be a series of models
that will be used for various functions?
Sergey: 16:43
Yeah, good question, so I'll give you
an answer. It's a slightly aspirational answer, so
maybe this is more like where I wish things were
headed. I don't know if this is necessarily where
things will head, but I think it's very important
for robotics to kind of adopt a paradigm where
we are in the habit of having reusable models,
where, just like in computer vision and NLP,
if a researcher produces a good model, other
robotics researchers should be able to use it.
Now, that might seem like a very obvious thing,
but this is not actually how robotics works
today. Most robotic learning research,
the artefact that is produced is not actually
the model, it's the code or the paper or the
insights. The models themselves are almost never
portable, never mind across labs, even across
different locations in the same lab, different
times of day in the same lab, that sort of thing.
Sergey: 17:35
And I think we really need to move
that towards a setting where we have models that
are trained on datasets that enable generalisation
across different locations and systems, different
objects, that sort of thing that we can then give
to other researchers, other practitioners that
will also run on their systems, and once we've
got a good flow for doing that, maybe using things
like this RTX dataset that has multiple robots,
maybe using some other data, but something where
we can just get on the habit of doing that.
Sergey: 18:03
Then we can actually make more progress
as a community towards shared, generalizable
systems. Now, until that happens, there's
absolutely no question about whether people will
use the same architecture, the same model, like if
they can't even share anything across, then that
won't work. But once we can share something and
probably the key to that is a dataset that enables
that then the community can figure it out, like,
maybe at that point perhaps it'll be realistic to
have a single pre-trained backbone, like the Lama
model in natural language, processing an analog
to that and robotics, and then people can build
on top of that. Or maybe there will be several
such things. Maybe there will be a few big ones,
that kind of the big, well-equipped labs produce
that others will then build on. But before we get
to any of that we need to just get in the habit
of actually building models that others can run.
Craig: 18:50
The other side to robotics is just the hardware,
and I was talking to a guy the other day who was
talking about where robotic control systems are
heading, and he was. He's not a roboticist or an
AI researcher, but he was waxing very optimistic
about, you know, there being household robots
within three to five years, and that sounded
unlikely to me, because just the hardware
alone is not at least the hardware that I've
seen is nowhere near being able to do, you know,
releasing it into an unstructured environment full
of randomness. Do you think that the hardware
is moving along with the AI or is it lagging?
Sergey: 19:44
That's a good question. I think that a very
important part of that question is just what kind
of hardware we need. I think to a large extent,
learning methods should actually lower the bar
for the hardware that's necessary. Basically,
the exercise you can do is you can get
one of these like little trash-bicker
devices and see what kind of tasks you
can do around the house with it. I mean,
obviously it's very limiting, so there's
some things you can do you couldn't do,
but there's also a lot of things you could
do with it. Certainly you can, you know,
tidy up the floor, put things in different
locations in the kitchen. It's actually
kind of surprising how much a relatively
primitive robotic system can accomplish.
Sergey: 20:24
So there's a very
nice work out of Professor Chelsea Finn's
group that I also helped with a little bit,
by a student named Tony Zhao who developed a
bimanual robotic system out of two low-cost robots
from Trostin Robotics. So these are not even the
fancy industrial arms. These are basically very
fancy hobbyist robots. So they cost about, I
think, $5,000 each, and most of his kind of
cleverness in his research was in devising a very
convenient tele-operation system, a tele-operation
rig that he could hold with his hands and control
this fairly cheap bimanual system and he would
demonstrate all sorts of very complex behaviours.
You get this thing like putting a shoe on a foot,
using tape to tape down a box, things like
that, and then you know the learning methodology
that could produce the autonomous policy was
well designed but not particularly profound.
Sergey: 21:24
It sort of used
state-of-the-art transform-based techniques but
didn't really have any particularly surprising
innovation. The key to it was really building
a really good tele-operation rig that allowed
him to produce those behaviours and then a very
high-quality engineer to then get that up down
to policy. So this is called the Aloha system, you
know, for those who are listening, I encourage you
to check it out and it probably gives some idea
of what even very primitive hardware is capable
of if it's equipped with the right data, the right
kind of tele-operation rig to provide that data
and kind of good bread-and-butter modern machine
learning techniques. Now that's still not going to
do everything around the house, but I suspect that
for folks that watch these Aloha videos it'll kind
of maybe slightly change their mind in terms of
the kind of hardware we really need for everyday
tasks. So probably there is still some innovation,
but it might actually be less than you think.
Craig: 22:15
That's interesting.
And then the controller side, the AI
side, the model side, is it? I mean,
if that is adequate, that hardware, how much
more improvement is needed on the control?
Sergey: 22:30
side. That's a complex question
because that's probably very heavily dependent on
the required bar for robustness and the degree of
generalisation. So in some ways that sort of
parallels the autonomous driving story right,
like if you wanted to build an autonomous car that
could, you know, succeed in like 90% of cases,
well, that's probably something that we've
had for over a decade. But if you want an
autonomous car that will succeed, that will avoid
catastrophic failures, with enough robustness that
you could just deploy it on any road in any
city, just dealing with all those tail cases,
that's still an open problem and I think
with home robots it's going to be the same
way that if you want to lop off the bulk of
the things and the bulk of the situations,
maybe that's not quite there yet, but I think that
it's reasonable to imagine that we get there soon.
But how long it takes to get that long tail fully
figured out, that's a much more complex question.
Sergey: 23:22
I think that one thing that's pretty interesting
is the degree to which vision language models have
progressed over the last really over just like
the last 12 months and that's especially relevant
for robotics, because, while the way that vision
language models are typically used is more for you
know, kind of perception, traditional perception
tasks, question answering that sort of thing,
the ability to reason about visual observations,
perform inferences about spatial arrangements of
objects, that sort of thing that is something that
is likely to translate into better robotic
capability, and, because generalisation is
one of those big challenges I mentioned the slump
tail issue I think there is a lot of reason to be
optimistic about the potential for those models
to eventually improve the robustness of robotic
controllers as well.
Sergey: 24:11
People are talking about combining language and
vision, or I should say language and world models,
into agents that can reason, plan and take action.
That sounded to me very much like robotic control.
Sergey: 24:27
I guess what I'm asking
is that research and the people who are in robotic
control, research on different tracks, the answer
is a little bit complicated, but maybe the short
version is that, yes, it's closely related to a
lot of robotics problems. In fact, there's plenty
of work in robotics on using language models for
essentially constructing plans and then connecting
those plans up to some kind of control mechanism
that can bring them about. Now, probably,
this stuff started maybe roughly two years
ago. Probably one of the more well-known works
in this area is the Seikan paper from Google,
which used a language model to plan long horizon
behaviours for robots. Initially in this field,
one of the big challenges that people
were concerned about is how to connect
up the language model to perception and action,
because standard language models have to operate
on symbolic representations of the world, so you
have to take those symbolic representations and
somehow weld them on to rich sensory perception
and complex actuation. Now, initially the way
that this was done was kind of along the lines of
what you described, by trying to construct some
sort of joint planning procedure that would figure
out both a probable sequence of symbolic steps,
essentially language and the corresponding
behaviours that would bring that about. There's
actually a paper from one of my colleagues
from Skult, grounded Decoding, which proposes
a Bayesian filtering approach to doing exactly
that. That said, something that we've seen over
the last maybe like six to nine months is that
increasingly, with vision language models becoming
more powerful, a very appealing alternative
instead of doing this is to actually train
models end to end to solve the entire problem.
Now those models can still be doing planning.
Sergey: 26:21
If you have a vision language
model that outputs text and also outputs actions,
you can do essentially the analog of chain of
thought prompting. You can say okay, here's some
complex problem and produce steps for solving
that problem, and then, once you've produced those
steps, then produce the actions and that works. So
you could tell a robot okay, like, make breakfast
and also get to make breakfast, I need to do this
and this and this, and then, for the first step
of that, it'll try to output the actions. So
that's a viable way to use vision language
models, but then it's still. You would still
end up with one model that does that, and that's
very desirable, because if you have one model,
then you don't need to deal with this problem of
trying to somehow stuff visual observations into
symbolic representation to then pass into the
language model. Basically, instead of designing
that interface by hand, it emerges naturally
through joint training of the whole thing.
Sergey: 27:09
So this is actually
the principle in which the R2-2 model works, and
one of the examples there that illustrates this
kind of chain of thought style approach is as we
asked it. We wanted to intentionally construct a
scene where the correct behaviour is a little
bit non-obvious. So we had a scene that had
some common household items and had some tools
with the wrong kind of tools so it's supposed
to hammer in a nail. There was no hammer,
but there's a rock and we asked, "Okay,
you need to hammer in the nail, what should you
do? And then it figures out that you should pick
up the rock. It actually says rocks and then it
goes and exits to the corresponding actions. So
now that's very primitive planning, right? So it's
kind of more semantic inference than planning. But
these things are in their infancy. I think they'll
progress a lot more over the next few years.
Craig: 27:55
Do you? In the
last five years, which is about the
time I think since I spoke to you,
has the progress in your field specifically
mirrored the progress in generative AI?
Sergey: 28:14
I think that progress in robotics always
to dust into lag behind everything else, because
when we figure out effective learning techniques,
then we then it's always a longer journey to
go from kind of conceptual method to product,
to a small scale prototype, to larger scale
prototype, because with generative models,
well, you can harvest lots and lots of data
off the web, so the lag between developing a
method and then scaling it up to internet
scale data is typically relatively short.
Sergey: 28:46
With robots that's usually not the case.
So while certainly modern advances in generative
modelling have made a big impact on robotics and
there's particular very interesting adaptations of
those techniques that combine with reinforcement
learning, planning and so on, I would say that
so far we have a lot of good indications of
the potential for these things, but we don't have
the kind of large scale prototypes that have been
produced, for example, for diffusion models,
for image generation or for language models.
And I think the key there is actually getting
these kinds of reusable models with large and
diverse data, so that would make it possible
for us to produce these larger prototypes.
Craig: 29:23
Yeah, so what's next in your lab?
Sergey: 29:27
Yeah, so one of the things
we would like to do is provide the community with
pre-trained models, now that we actually have a
data set to work with that can be easily adapted
to a variety of downstream applications. So not
just a model that can do anything and that's maybe
too ambitious of a goal but at least a model that
can be adapted to do anything. So if you could
imagine, let's say, a model that is pre-trained to
take in language, take in maybe goal observations,
other forms of commands, and produce outputs for
a variety of different robot embodiments not with
the goal necessarily of solving every problem, but
providing a really good initialization. So that's
somebody that has a particular specific robotic
system with a particular desired formulation of
their task, a particular objective. They could
take this and, with a much more modest amount of
data, adapt to their problem. And I think that now
that we actually have good multi-robot data sets
and fairly mature techniques in terms of how to
train models with variable inputs and outputs,
we're actually just about ready to do that. So
our first prototype for this should be coming out
very soon. But this is going to be the first step.
Sergey: 30:30
From there,
a lot of what we have to investigate is
what does the life cycle of such a system
actually look like? What are the right
techniques for efficiently fine-tuning
robotic foundation models to particular
domains, to different morphologies,
different commands and so on? And there's probably
actually a lot of interesting questions to be
answered there. For example, robots can collect
data autonomously, so could you, for example,
have an autonomous fine-tuning procedure based
off of one of these pre-trained models? Could
you have a fine-tuning procedure that respects
safety constraints, things like that? So there's
a lot of interesting questions that we could
answer once we have that base model all set up.
Craig: 31:05
There's a lot of people I've
been talking to about the proprietary, open-source
debate. With regard to generative AI In robotics,
is there an analogous situation where there are
enterprises that have tremendous resources? I
mean, the robotics are not as compute-intensive
as the models you're talking about. Is that right,
and so is it more equal at what's happening
in industry and what's happening in research?
Sergey: 31:38
Yeah, it's complicated.
So certainly compute constraints are an
issue right, especially once we go into
vision language models. The most effective vision
language models are actually the largest models
out there. So the largest version of the R2-2
model, for example, is 500 billion per amperes,
so very much in the same ballpark as the largest
models out there. Of course, you can do a lot
of experiments at a much smaller scale, and
that does make it somewhat more accessible.
Sergey: 32:03
In terms of data.
It's kind of interesting. There are definitely
companies that have large numbers of robots
deployed. Those are not necessarily the companies
that have the most interesting data, though,
because if they're deployed in a warehouse, it's
mostly grasping of items and maybe in some ways,
the open data from researchers is actually more
interesting. The picture changes somewhat if you
go into mobility, things like autonomous driving,
like yeah, there's going to be big industrial
players with their own proprietary stuff, but
even there, like data sets constructed from
dashboard mounted cameras that are out there now
are actually very large Certainly not as large as
what Tesla or Waymo has, but substantial. So I
think you're right that some of the proprietary
advantages are not as large, but it's kind
of. Maybe the more pessimistic take on it
is that it's because no one has the data. So the
companies don't have the data because no one does.
Craig: 32:58
the control of an autonomous vehicle and the
control of a robot arm or some other form factor,
but are they different fields? I mean, when you're
working on these models, are you also thinking
about their application in autonomous vehicles?
Sergey: 33:17
So traditionally
these are extremely different problems, but
what we're increasingly seeing is a degree of
consolidation in the sense that very similar
building blocks can be reduced. So I think
actual autonomous driving is maybe one of the
tougher things because of all the constraints
and regulations and all that stuff. But
for small scale mobile robots like Think,
like Drones, sidewalk Robots, et cetera, we
already have research projects where we've
developed vision based navigation policies. For
these things they use essentially the same exact
architecture as what we use for the robotic
manipulation problems, and a very natural next
step is to actually combine, not just have the
same architecture, but literally the same model.
Sergey: 33:55
In principle, at this point,
there isn't really any technological
obstacle to doing that. Now, of course,
there's a lot more to driving, let's say, an
autonomous car than just avoiding obstacles and
reaching the destination. You have to put in a lot
more knowledge, constraints, all this other stuff,
and that probably is rather specialised. But
my hypothesis is that we'll probably actually
see a lot of consolidation around the same basic
building blocks for the core perception action
system within these things, and then maybe where
they would differ is the kind of planning layer
that sits on top of that and then directs it in
terms of what to actually do in a given situation.
Sergey: 34:29
In your work? There is a pull
for academics because of the computer constraints
and money and salary and that sort of thing to
pull people into the industry. Are you working
straddling academia and industry? Are you firm?
Sergey: 34:51
Yeah, so I spend 20% of my time working
with Google DeepMind. I think that, in terms of
the degree to which an industry researcher or
academic researcher in robotics is more or less
appealing or progressive, I think probably it's a
little more, I would say, tilted towards academia
than, for example, natural language processing or
vision, and maybe in part it's because there are a
lot more of the big questions to figure out before
things actually have revenue, so to speak. You
could build a language model or vision system
that provides an actual business case today,
whereas analog and robotics are probably still
a few years out. That said, I do think that
there's a lot of rapid progress and certainly
a lot of students from my group are excited about
starting companies based on technologies they're
developing and things like that. So I think
we'll see that catching up in the near future
Craig: 35:47
And you think that this
is the year that AI hit the public sphere and
people confuse robotics with AI all the time.
Will the day come I mean, obviously the day will
come, but when do you think the day will come that
there will be some commercial application
or open source application that is adopted
by the public, that people will suddenly
be talking about robots as opposed to AI?
Sergey: 36:23
Yeah, that's a complex
question because I think that if I had to guess,
I would guess that a lot of what's needed beyond
the core technologies is a pretty substantial
upfront investment to overcome the activation
energy to get somebody about to be practical.
And that's not too unprecedented in the sense
that more or less the same thing happened with
language models. The core technology for next
token prediction is pretty old. What was needed
to develop the kinds of technologies and products
that really capture the public imagination is
a large investment of effort into engineering
them really really well and curating, collecting
and assembling the right data sets to get them to
work really well for a thing that basically
anybody could grab and use. That's partly.
Sergey: 37:14
There's a scientific question there,
but a lot of it is really sort of organisational
economics kind of questions, and the trouble with
those things is that they're hard to predict
because they have more to do with the point in
time at which people decide that it's time to lay
out those big resources to make it happen rather
than just predicting when the technology will
evolve. So the technology might evolve steadily,
but then the inflection is really the resource
allocation, so I can't predict when that would
happen. If I had to bet. My bet would be closer
to five years than to 10, but I'm not sure.
Craig: 37:49
Has been. This
threat debate has created a lot of acrimony
in the community. Do you have a view on that,
or is your territory removed enough
that you don't engage in that?
Sergey: 38:08
Yeah, it's a complicated
question. I tend not to prefer not to get too much
into discussions like that Because I'm not really
sure exactly how things will go, and I think that,
partly perhaps as a roboticist, I Maybe tend to be
a little more pessimistic about where we're at in
terms of overall AI systems. It's hard to imagine
that an AI system that can't control a robot to
do basic things that are easy for humans would be
all that capable overall, but the stuff is hard
to predict. I think that maybe the one constant
in AI research is that people are continually
surprised by the things that turn out to be easier
than imagined and also the things that turn out
to be a lot harder than imagined. If you go back
a couple of decades, it'll be pretty shocking
to think that, for example, artists and writers
would feel threatened by AI systems long before,
like the gardeners and cleaners would, but that is
the world that we live in today. Maybe that tells
us to be a little humble about our predictions.
Craig: 39:14
Yeah, that's
right. The governments around the world are
very focused on regulation of generative AI
specifically. Is there regulation
or governments looking at robotics,
or AI and robotics? In the same way, is
there government support? There's been a
lot of talk about providing compute resources to
research and smaller companies so that that's not
held within these big tech companies. Is
there that kind of talk in robotics that
the government should or could provide
more resources to accelerate research?
Sergey: 40:04
Yeah, there's certainly plenty
of talk about that. It's typically not, from
what I've seen, not something that tends to
separate out robotics or AI versus other things.
There's certainly talk about it. I haven't seen a
great deal of action yet, but I imagine it's
something that moves slowly. I don't think I
would say anything differently than any other AI
researcher in that respect. I don't think that,
from what I've seen so far, there's anything
that treats robotics in a particularly special
way in that regard. But yes, this is a big
issue and it's probably something that we,
certainly in the United States, need to think
carefully about how we're going to maintain our
technological edge and how we're going to allocate
the resources that are necessary for that.
Craig: 40:46
And that leads me to another question, because I
spent a lot of my life in China. Where is China in
this research? Do you think they're ahead, behind?
Sergey: 40:59
I'm not sure
exactly. One thing I will say is that I think that
researchers from China, from Chinese universities,
have been very successful across all areas of
AI, including robotics, and certainly a lot of
really interesting research increases in IDUCI
coming out of China. For example, when we were
doing a lot of our data set collection work,
we were actually very surprised to learn in the
middle of it that there was a really amazing data
set that was released by some researchers from
Shanghai that was comparable in size and scope
and diversity to the one that we were collecting,
and that was wonderful. They released it open
source. I talked to them on the phone. They
had really interesting thoughts about what
they wanted to use it for, so I am seeing a
lot of uptick in terms of the quality and
the kind of results that are coming out.
Sergey: 41:47
The other interesting
thing is that actually a surprising number of
advances in hardware have actually been enabled
by companies out of China. For example, one of
the most widely used platforms for quadrupedal
locomotion research is produced by a company
called Unitary from China, and I think a lot
of the things that make that platform so
appealing are that it's relatively simple,
it's affordable and it's designed in a way
that makes it easy for researchers to get into
the guts of it, and that also, in my opinion,
has actually been a very good thing, because,
while we might be concerned about competition and
all that, in the end it's actually accelerating
research here in the United States. So that's
what I've seen so far, I mean without trying to
make any value judgments on what's good or
bad. It seems like there's a lot going on.
Craig: 42:32
That's it for this episode. I
want to thank Sergey for his time. If you want
to read a transcript of today's conversation,
you can find one on our website, EYEONAI,
that's E-Y-E hyphen on AI. In the meantime,
remember the singularity may not be near, but
AI is changing your world, so pay attention.